Title:        Reporting Bugs
URL:          https://wiki.lustre.org/Reporting_Bugs
Page ID:      893
Last Updated: 2021-05-11T19:48:28Z
Last Editor:  Adilger
Edit Comment: link to Jira instead of Bugzilla

--- Content ---
(Updated: May 2021)

Jira (https://jira.whamcloud.com) for Lustre™ is an issue tracker as well as a bug tracker. It is a one-stop repository for:
-  Bugs
-  Enhancement requests
-  Tracking patch submission
-  Issue dependency tracking

A bug-tracking system is less-error prone and superior to email in dozens of ways. For this reason we ask that all the above issues be handled exclusively through Jira.

All of the important links described below are accessible from the Jira main page or the toolbar at the bottom of each Bugzilla page.

Opening an Account
To use Jira, you will need to open an account. On the Main page are instructions for creating a new account.  This is, unfortunately, no longer a totally automated process due to spam and malicious users.

Searching for Bugs
You can search for bugs in Jira in two ways: 

-  Enter the issue number (e.g. LU-12000 (https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-12000)) or search on a keyword (https://jira.whamcloud.com/issues/?jql=).
-  Search for specific text or specify detailed or complex criteria with the Advanced Search (https://jira.whamcloud.com/issues/?jql=) option.

Filing a Bug
To file a bug, complete these steps:

1. Before opening a new bug report, do a quick search to avoid filing a duplicate bug.

2. To enter a new bug report, click on "Create" in the top menu. 

3. In the bug report form, fill in as many fields as you can. If your version of Lustre isn't listed, include it in a note in the bug Environment.

4. Include a useful Summary line and a more complete Description. At a minimum, include the following:

-  Describe the problem that you're solving, the feature that you're adding, or the enhancement that you're requesting.
-  If you are reporting a bug, describe precisely the behavior that you're seeing and the behavior that you think is correct.
-  Provide a minimal a test case. For example, if 'tar' is crashing, try to narrow the issue down to a specific syscall with e.g. strace. If you have tried to narrow it down without success, tell us what you tried.
-  If you are submitting a patch, see Submitting Changes for a detailed procedure.

Priority Bugs
If you have a support contract for Lustre, contact your support provider directly.

Note: Severity 1 bugs can be filed only for corruption events or by customers with support contracts who are experiencing a production outage event.
