Key:        LUDOC-498
Summary:    Inviting contributions to Lustre Internals wiki documentation
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LUDOC-498
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Lustre Manual Triage
Reporter:   Anjus George
Created:    Wed, 17 Nov 2021 14:58:46 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 17 Nov 2021 16:15:08 +0000

--- Description ---
This ticket is created with reference to the documentation of internals of the Lustre file system hosted in this page: https://wiki.lustre.org/Understanding_Lustre_Internals. The documentation is a collaborative effort of Lustre team from ORNL including Anjus George, Rick Mohr, James Simmons and Sarp Oral.

We are interested in making this a community effort and invite more contributions from the Lustre community. Members from the Lustre community are welcome to contribute towards this documentation.

The documentation aims to explain the internal workings of the latest version of the Lustre file system. It provides complete and up-to-date information and should serve as a foundational document for anyone interested in Lustre software development. Key data structures will be described along with the APIs used for interaction among the various Lustre subsystems.

More subsystems will be added to this documentation including Lustre Tests, Utils, Mgc, Obdclass, libcfs and fid. We are in the process of adding more subsystems and extending the documentation. Our team is currently working on adding details about ptlrpc subsystem.

--- Comment (georgea, Wed, 17 Nov 2021 16:15:08 +0000) ---
Thanks Peter for adding the description field to the ticket.

--- Comment (georgea, Wed, 17 Nov 2021 15:12:18 +0000) ---
This ticket is created with reference to the documentation of internals of the Lustre file system hosted in this page: https://wiki.lustre.org/Understanding_Lustre_Internals. The documentation is a collaborative effort of Lustre team from ORNL including Anjus George, Rick Mohr, James Simmons and Sarp Oral.

We are interested in making this a community effort and invite more contributions from the Lustre community. Members from the Lustre community are welcome to contribute towards this documentation.

The documentation aims to explain the internal workings of the latest version of the Lustre file system. It provides complete and up-to-date information and should serve as a foundational document for anyone interested in Lustre software development. Key data structures will be described along with the APIs used for interaction among the various Lustre subsystems.

More subsystems will be added to this documentation including Lustre Tests, Utils, Mgc, Obdclass, libcfs and fid. We are in the process of adding more subsystems and extending the documentation. Our team is currently working on adding details about ptlrpc subsystem.

--- Comment (simmonsja, Wed, 17 Nov 2021 15:06:17 +0000) ---
Is their a way to add a description after ticket creation?
