Key:        LUDOC-238
Summary:    Translate documentation to Russian
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LUDOC-238
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Resolved
Resolution: Incomplete
Assignee:   Richard Henwood
Reporter:   Vladimir Romanov
Created:    Thu, 3 Apr 2014 12:20:46 +0000
Updated:    Thu, 24 Mar 2016 19:11:34 +0000
Resolved:   Thu, 24 Mar 2016 19:11:34 +0000

--- Description ---
I am from Russia, and now i am translating Gentoo Linux Handbook and Wiki to Russian language. I am interested in Lustre also, and want to learn it. As the best way to learn is to read documentation, i want to translate Lustre docs also (to Russian). Is this possible, and if yes, then how? (I know, that i can take docs, translate it and put it on my own site, but i want to share docs with community, if it is possible on this site).

--- Comment (adilger, Thu, 24 Mar 2016 19:11:34 +0000) ---
Haven't seen any updates here in two years, please reopen if there is some progress.

--- Comment (rhenwood, Fri, 4 Apr 2014 18:17:19 +0000) ---
Sounds good. 

One request:

When you are going through your process - please file an LUDOC for any issues you find with the current manual.

... and one detail:

/I/ can not promise to merge docs - we have a peer review process that all changes must go through before merging.

Stay in touch - and let me know how it goes!

--- Comment (blueboar2, Fri, 4 Apr 2014 02:45:42 +0000) ---
How can i fix existing LUDOC? To fix LUDOC i need to dig into documentation and learn about how Lustre works. If i will learn, how it is works, then i can just install it to my servers and use it.

I want to learn it and learn together with translation. So, when the translation ends (of course, there will be updates over time), i will understand, how Lustre works.

Proposal: If i need to feel the work-flow, but i don't know Lustre yet. Can i translate ALL of docs, put them in some site. As it will take long time, you, of course, will move to Publican by that time (with me, or without me). Then (as i will know Lustre by that time), i will fix some amount of LUDOC issues, and we will merge the docs?

--- Comment (rhenwood, Thu, 3 Apr 2014 17:22:58 +0000) ---
Hi Vladimir,

I admire your enthusiasm! 

I do want to set your expectations with regard to workflow we are committed to for both Lustre software source code changes and the Operations Manual changes:

All changes must complete a successful review by two reviewers with suitable experience. Assuming the Publican re-factoring work can be completed in time, my biggest practical concern is that you would complete your work and there is no one available to provide the review.

As you pointed out - your efforts would not be wasted if reviewers cannot be found. You can share your version of the manual under the same license as our version of the manual... but I want to do my best to ensure your work is integrated in a single manual.

Can I try again and suggest you choose an existing LUDOC ticket to get a feel for the work-flow and have something to show quickly? This will also give me an opportunity to plan a time line for moving to Publican.

--- Comment (blueboar2, Thu, 3 Apr 2014 15:34:26 +0000) ---
It's fine about large number of changes. I will handle it.

So, i need to translate large amount of text, you need to refactor manual structure. Why not take a break for example, for 2-3 months? I will translate some reasonable amount of text, you will think, how to refactor properly. Then we will meet again, and will do something with translation?

--- Comment (rhenwood, Thu, 3 Apr 2014 15:20:28 +0000) ---
Hi Vladimir,

Lustre docs are marked up as Docbook 5 XML. Docbook 5 has a mechanism for adding additional languages described here: http://www.sagehill.net/docbookxsl/Localizations.html

Currently, in my opinion, the documentation project is not well prepared to begin a translation effort for the reasons:

+ the current manual is in a single directory. To accommodate multiple languages cleanly, we should re-factor the manual structure - probably following the publican model. http://jfearn.fedorapeople.org/en-US/Publican/4.0/html/Users_Guide/

+ the current English language manual has not achieved quiescence: i.e. there are a large number of changes that are arriving. Any translation effort would need to track a moving target.

There are a number of existing tasks that need attention: https://jira.hpdd.intel.com/browse/LUDOC . Tackling one of these tasks is a great introduction to a particular part of the Lustre file system and the documentation workflow. Are there any that are of interest?

richard,
