Key:        LU-18269
Summary:    NRS TBF bucket prioritization
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-18269
Type:       Bug
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   WC Triage
Reporter:   Andreas Dilger
Created:    Wed, 25 Sep 2024 09:25:17 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 9 Oct 2024 20:51:35 +0000
Labels:     TBF

--- Description ---
The NRS TBF implementation prioritizes RPC scheduling to handle RPCs with the oldest deadline.  However, if a job is submitting a more RPCs that cannot be processed in each timeslice (e.g. a "bad job") then these RPCs will actually have a higher priority in later time slices because they have missed their deadline.

While this is OK if "real time" scheduling is more important, this is actually the opposite of what we want for normal behavior, which is fair share among the jobs and processing the small number of RPCs for most jobs, and only process the many RPCs from the "bad job" afterward.

This is especially true when the "bad job" is sending too many RPCs for the server to process, so that they are all delayed.  This will prioritize those delayed RPCs even when they are the source of the server load.

Some change needs to be made to the TBF processing so that it will "round robin" RPC selection among buckets with the same priority, rather than always preferring buckets with the oldest deadline.

--- Comment (adilger, Wed, 9 Oct 2024 20:33:52 +0000) ---
this ensures that the requests from login nodes will not starvation and will be handled within deadline as much as possible even on a heavy loaded server.

The most common complaint that I've heard is that one bad user/job is using most of the server resources, and this is starving the "normal" user/job RPCs.  In such a case, we don't want the "bad" user/job RPCs to be handled first (they are already late will be delayed further because the server is overloaded), but should prefer the "normal" user/job RPCs that just arrived that are still below the deadline.  This would be like "shortest job first" in CPU scheduling.

If there is a generic way to specify this within the current TBF framework, then that would be great.  If not, then this is what we should look at implementing.  Something like:

	prioritize scheduling the RPCs from buckets (uid/jobid) that are smallest and can be completed within the deadline

	schedule in round-robin RPCs from buckets (uid/jobid) that are larger and have already exceeded the deadline

This will try and keep small/short/interactive RPC handling fast, while the batch RPC handling will be slowed down slightly (which most users do not really care about).

One of the important functionality is to have a way that a simple TBF rule can be specified to put each UID/JobID/PROJID is put into a separate TBF bucket so that these can be used for balancing.  Does this exist today?

--- Comment (qian_wc, Thu, 26 Sep 2024 02:08:11 +0000) ---
TBF schedules TBF bucket according to the deadline, and this ensures that the requests from login nodes will not starvation and will be handled within deadline as much as possible even on a heavy loaded server.

"realtime" is a policy for TBF under heavy load to ensure the TBF bucket meeting its rate as much as possible.

Under light load, there are idle I/O service threads waiting for I/O requests, but the TBF scheduler is throttled as there is no deadline expiration for any TBF buckets.

In this case, it does not make full use of disk/CPU resource on the server and results in server disk bandwidth wasting.

In this case, we can put all buckets having pending requests (but the deadline is not expired) with "best effort" requirement into a list, and schedule the requests in these TBF buckets in best effort manner in round-robin order.

 

The problem is how to judge （or what is the criterion) that the server is under heavy load or light load and determine to do best effort scheduling when the server has idle available CPU/disk resource to use.

To avoid overloaded the server, we can determine whether starting best effort scheduling according to the numbers of idle I/O service threads and running  I/O service threads (I/O RPCs in handling), and disk bandwidth?

Or a simple way to just schedule the I/O request if there is any idle I/O service threads until there is no any available I/O thread?

--- Comment (adilger, Wed, 25 Sep 2024 23:27:10 +0000) ---
It seems like the "realtime" scheduling would be the opposite of what we want?  If there is some "bad job" submitting a large number of writes will get a priority boost because it has many RPCs that could not be scheduled, and the "low volume" jobs will have their RPCs throttled because they are not delayed very much yet. 

What I'm thinking of is something like NRR (but within the TBF framework to do "Kobe" or whatever) to process the (usually few) RPCs from the login nodes promptly, and then "best effort" for the remaining "bad" RPCs in each timeslice.

--- Comment (qian_wc, Wed, 25 Sep 2024 14:22:23 +0000) ---
What about realtime TBF which described in LU-9228?

We can do some optimization for LU-9228. For the deadline miss for the bad job, we can  Compensate a certain percentage of miss time slices (we can convert it into tokens) (80%) to the TBF bucket (class). Thus the request in this bucket with real time requirement will be scheduled as much as possible, and meet 80% of I/O rate requirements and meanwhile avoid the scheduling starvation with priority scheduling.

--- Comment (adilger, Wed, 25 Sep 2024 12:11:17 +0000) ---
qian_wc what are your thoughts on this, to change TBF from deadline based selection to more "balanced"?  I understand that this would change the behavior of TBF, but I think "fair share" or "round robin" would better give the behavior that users want.
