Key:        LU-18819
Summary:    allow direct IB GUID addressing without IPoIB
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-18819
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   WC Triage
Reporter:   Andreas Dilger
Created:    Sun, 16 Mar 2025 13:21:17 +0000
Updated:    Fri, 22 Aug 2025 18:48:04 +0000
Labels:     configure, lnet, o2iblnd, usability
Links:      Related: is related to  LU-10360; Related: is related to  LU-17743; Related: is related to LU-16086

--- Description ---
Currently it is required that IB networks have IPoIB configured in order to establish an initial connection to the IB peer via its IP address so that it can fetch the IB GUID.  This also simplifies configuration somewhat because IP dotted-quad addresses are easier to manage than IB GUIDs.  It is also possible to use DNS to perform hostname->IP lookups (e.g. to the MGS), but the current Lustre configuration logs require IP addresses to be stored because the kernel does not (or at least did not) have the ability to lookup hostnames directly (though that may have changed in newer kernels).

After that initial IP connection, o2iblnd does not use IP for any traffic.

It would be desirable to eliminate the requirement for IPoIB in networks where this is not needed, without administrators having to manage IB GUIDs directly (which are long, complex, do not necessarily follow a consistent pattern).

--- Comment (adilger, Sun, 16 Mar 2025 19:34:20 +0000) ---
Sure, but that's a chicken-and-egg problem then. How do you know which GUID to query in the first place, without having an out-of-band communication mechanism?

--- Comment (simmonsja, Sun, 16 Mar 2025 15:19:29 +0000) ---
I believe the GUID can be queried by the inifinband layer itself.

--- Comment (adilger, Sun, 16 Mar 2025 13:31:33 +0000) ---
One option would be to add DNS txt records that report the IB GUID for a peer node, so that it is possible to do a lookup of e.g. "hostname@ib" to get the GUID record and use that to establish the peer connection directly.  This has the advantage of using existing infrastructure.  However, I think cluster administrators have some obstacle/reluctance for using DNS, since it is already possible to use DNS for MGS hostname resolution (e.g. mgsnode@tcp or mgsnode@o2ib) instead of specifying the MGS IP addresses, but in my experience the MGS IP addresses are overwhelmingly used instead of hostnames.

Possibly, this could be improved by having a DNS server on the MGS itself, so that it could be configured/administered by the cluster admin directly.  Potentially we could even embed/depend on a very simple DNS server with the MGS, but it isn't clear if that has any advantage over just documenting/automating the process of configuring an external/existing DNS server package on the MGS (e.g. via Recommends: in the lustre.spec file.

Another option that had been proposed in the past was for the MGS to provide its own (non-DNS) name lookup or configuration service, but it isn't clear that this is a win over just configuring a dedicated DNS service with txt records for the GUIDs.  

We could use something like an IB-based Rendezvous protocol to advertise the OSTs and MDTs to the MGS and then register them in the Imperative Recovery (IR) target list for the clients to use.  However, peer discovery over a large network with many segments may be slow, difficult, or impossible (though possibly LNet routers could be forwarders?).
