Key:        LU-19307
Summary:    OSC: replace client page LRU with improved cache algorithm
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-19307
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Medium
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   WC Triage
Reporter:   Keguang Xu
Created:    Thu, 28 Aug 2025 09:27:14 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 10 Sep 2025 13:11:40 +0000
Labels:     medium

--- Description ---
This is a mirror issue of LU-11509:LDLM: replace client lock LRU with improved cache algorithm. The current client side page LRU cache algorithm may evict frequently used pages when performing operations like `ls` or `find` on large directories, specifically during ll_iterate. An improved cache replacement algorithm (e.g ARC) might be helpful to ensure more frequently accessed pages remain resident on the client, preventing unnecessary eviction.

paf0186, adilger, given your expertise, could you please provide your insight on the feasibility and potential benefits of this approach?

--- Comment (JIRAUSER19404, Wed, 10 Sep 2025 07:00:02 +0000) ---
I think scanninglocks or pages periodically is inefficient vs. doing it on demand as those locks or pages are being accessed for other reasons.

I proposed the background thread suggestion as for large extents it would be time-consuming to scan & check pages' activities, until I realized that in common access patterns, pages of large files would only be accessed once, while pages of small files are more likely to be accessed multiple times.

Therefore, to alleviate the hot-page-cold-lock issue, we may add an extra check during EXT lock eviction procedure `ldlm_prepare_lru_list`, only sample the head 8 pages - it's representative for both small files and large files' frequently used index/meta part -  and check their PG_active, then refresh their last_used timestamp accordingly (4 active out of 8 pages indicate a hot lock?) which in turn may prevent really active lock from being evicted. Note, for other read patterns it won't help.

One more thing, EXT lock LRU eviction based on lock age may need to be adjusted because glimpse locks introduced through`ls -l` on large directories may be kept on LRU at last, or ARC maybe helpful. But that's another issue.

Above is a draft lacking details, just like to hear if the direction is correct or not.

--- Comment (adilger, Mon, 8 Sep 2025 04:27:40 +0000) ---
Also, I think scanninglocks or pages periodically is inefficient vs. doing it on demand as those locks or pages are being accessed for other reasons.

--- Comment (adilger, Sun, 7 Sep 2025 05:38:08 +0000) ---
I think page accesses should update the lock in the LRU, but one issue is fast read(4KiB or loss, which does not access the LDLM locks at all.

--- Comment (JIRAUSER19404, Wed, 3 Sep 2025 08:11:37 +0000) ---
Thanks adilger, it's interesting. So in read scenario, page cache page access would not be reflected in extent lock, causing the corresponding extent lock to age out and get evicted. As a result, the hot pages lose their protection and can be unfairly removed from the page cache during memory pressure. Please correct me if I misunderstood your point.

To avoid these innocent pages from being evicted, a dedicated background thread might be helpful? It could periodically (say, 5s) scan all extent-lock-covered-pages within osc cache, and leveraging VM active/inactive LRU list, if count(active) > threshold, then we could update lock's lru_score(used for LFRU/ARC). Besides, when the proportion of pages actively used by an object is very low (for example, fewer than 10 out of 1000 pages are active), the corresponding locks should be evicted as well, for the sake of memory.

We can manage IBT and EXT locks using different mechanisms. IBT locks should use LFRU, promoting the relatively high frequently accessed ones to the privileged list. EXT locks should be governed by ARC. The ARC's absolute scoring is better suited for the batch scanning operations described, making it a more effective choice for EXT locks.

Only that scanning may hurt performance, even it's performed in a background thread.

 

cc paf0186

--- Comment (adilger, Sat, 30 Aug 2025 09:19:35 +0000) ---
squalfof, the page cache eviction due to "ls" or "find" is because of LDLM LRU lock aging and not because of page cache management.  We used to deprioritize LRU eviction of locks with many pages ("lock weight") but that was also sub-optimal due to keeping large caches in memory on the client that were mostly unused.  Having a lot of pages on a single lock doesn't necessarily make that lock more important, though it does make it more expensive to repopulate into cache on the client.

I think what is needed is some hybrid approach that looks at both the lock age, page count, and how recently those pages have been accessed.  I don't know if the lock LRU is updated when the client does a page lookup.  That is likely expensive to do every time a page is accessed, so I'm wondering if there is some way to determine page last-access time from the server only.
