Key:        LU-19920
Summary:    Lustre directory docs
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-19920
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Medium
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Max Dilger
Reporter:   Max Dilger
Created:    Tue, 24 Feb 2026 21:00:56 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 4 Mar 2026 17:10:56 +0000

--- Description ---
This patch aims to add small descriptive files to each lustre directory . These are meant to be used for both developers and LLMs. They should give a high level technical overview of the given directory, aiming to aid with faster code navigation. These will not replace the man pages or LUDOCs. They also will not need to be updated after every patch, only after large changes or periodically. 

 

In the context of LLMs, current coding tools (claude code, augment, open code, cursor, codex etc) have gotten much better at giving useful info when allowed direct access to the users project directory. There are still drawbacks, with the current size of the lustre code base all of the tools use a substantial amount of tokens / context length getting oriented each time. These directory docs should give the LLMs a shortcut to get a grasp of the relevant areas it needs to look at without wasting time and tokens.

 

The later part of this ticket is experimental. We will do benchmarks before / after this patch to judge the effectiveness. Mainly timing the agents, comparing tokens used and grading response accuracy.

--- Comment (paf0186, Wed, 4 Mar 2026 17:10:56 +0000) ---
Well, we specifically don't want the documentation to be regenerated by the LLM repeatedly - the point is to bank (and correct) that effort.  If it has to be redone, then we're not getting any benefit.  Even if the LLM can do it reliably, creating the individual docs will be time consuming and expensive.

So however we do the docs - sub-dir, one big pile (though not just one file), we want to have all of the documentation pre-made.

I'd suggest we start trying stuff as time permits - I notice the Claude Code CLI gives token counts, so that could help us with measuring stuff.

--- Comment (JIRAUSER19234, Tue, 3 Mar 2026 23:35:34 +0000) ---
I would be willing to attempt both approaches, and see if one works better than the latter. I do generally like the idea of being able to assist LLM's with their increasing capabilities, but don't want to needlessly bloat the repo. I do wonder if we could create a single readme with enough detail to allow the LLM's to create their own sub-directory documentation, thus only creating these files for the users that want to use them. This could still also help newer developers navigate the code easier. The main risk of this approach is that there isn't any human verification of the directory docs after they are created. Willing to wait for more feedback on this ticket before I invest too much time into it.

--- Comment (paf0186, Wed, 25 Feb 2026 17:08:59 +0000) ---
I think the idea of having a short architecture doc in each sub-system serves a different purpose - it would be found along with the code by the LLM, at the same time as it looked at the code.

It's possible it could work just as well in the Documentation directory, I suppose - it would be worth testing.  But part of the point of these is that they be short and useful in a specific context.  Single large documents don't work well with the context window.

Review prompts are something else again.  This is brief architecture descriptions for each subsystem.  What is it, what is it for, how at a high level does it work.  Definitely not review prompts.

--- Comment (JIRAUSER18433, Wed, 25 Feb 2026 03:58:34 +0000) ---
I disagree with adding tiny READMEs throughout the code base. I think have centralized docs under Documentation would serve us better, since they could be read by developers as well, be integrated into kernel-doc, and could be consumed by LLMs just as easily. If you really want to collect LLM review prompts, I'd prefer that you do something similar to https://github.com/masoncl/review-prompts, which collects all of the prompts in a common directory and offers a script (or make target) to install them. It would be easy to track/manage them if they were all in the same place. And it would be clearer to an observer that it's a collection of LLM prompts.
