Key:        LU-11192
Summary:    console warning for TBF on client
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-11192
Type:       New Feature
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Li Xi
Reporter:   Li Xi
Created:    Mon, 30 Jul 2018 09:53:39 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 26 Sep 2018 07:25:13 +0000
Links:      Blocker: is blocking LU-11431

--- Description ---
The I/O rates of users can be throttled by TBF NRS policy. However,

normal users have no way to know whether the low performance is

cause by congestion of the system itself or caused by any TBF rule

added by the administer. They don't have any information about how

TBF NRS policy is affecting their I/O rate, thus cannot do anything

to react to the QoS situation.

To solve the problem, this patch print warning messages to the user's

consoles just like what quota mechanism is doing. When the I/O of an

application matches an TBF rule on the server side, a message will be

printed to the console of the process on the client side. The message

includes information of the rule name, the classification of

the RPC, the start/end time of the QoS period and whether further

limitation will be enforced later if more thresholds are reached.

This new feature assumes that a centralized tool will be used to

monitor the I/O performance of the whole file system and manage the

global configuration of TBF rules on all Lustre services. That tool

will monitor aggregate the I/O throughput (or metadata operations)

for each user (or job/client/group etc.) during a given time period.

And when a global threshold of the I/O throughput has been reached by

the user since the start time of the QoS period, TBF limitations will

be enforced on the whole Lustre file system. That tool will configure

TBF rules with enough information about this QoS decision. Two new

options have been added into the TBF rule for this purpose:

"start_epoch" and "end_epoch". If these two options are configured in

a TBF rule, the printed message will notify the users about the

start (or end) time of the QoS period.

There could be multiple QoS thresholds, e.g. one soft threshold and

one hard threshold. When user reached soft threshold, the RPC rate of

the user will be reduced to a slightly small value. And if the user

keeps on doing a lot of I/O and finally reached the hard threshold,

the global management tool might decide to enforce a very strict RPC

limitation. Thus, another option has been added to the TBF rule: 

"further_throttle". If this options is configured in a TBF rule, the

printed message will notify the users that he/she needs to slow down

the I/O rate until the end of this QoS period, otherwise, further

limitation will be enforced as a penalty.

To avoid the flood of messages to the user's console, the same

message can only printed to a console after a time interval. This

can be tuned as "qos_message_interval" parameter of ptlrpc module.

In order to know whether a message has been printed to a console

or not, a history of message will be kept in a hash table. The

size of the hash table can be configured as "qos_message_history_size"

parameter of ptlrpc module.

--- Comment (gerrit, Mon, 30 Jul 2018 09:55:01 +0000) ---
Li Xi (lixi@ddn.com) uploaded a new patch: https://review.whamcloud.com/32898

Subject: LU-11192 ptlrpc: console warning for TBF on client

Project: fs/lustre-release

Branch: master

Current Patch Set: 1

Commit: 1f08765eee5c54fb28af942f68bbf54828ffae4d
