Key:        LU-3592
Summary:    Repair multiple referenced OST-object
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-3592
Type:       Technical task
Priority:   Critical
Status:     Resolved
Resolution: Fixed
Assignee:   nasf
Reporter:   Richard Henwood
Created:    Tue, 16 Jul 2013 13:46:06 +0000
Updated:    Tue, 25 Feb 2014 00:23:26 +0000
Resolved:   Tue, 25 Feb 2014 00:23:26 +0000

--- Description ---
There are several options to repair the multiple referenced OST-object:

	Duplicate the multiple referenced OST-object. It is intuitive solution, but may cause some issues:
	
		Data leak. A malicious user may cheat the MDT to create the file with specified but invalid stripe information. If the specified stripe contains the OST-object FID that belongs to other file, then duplication for repairing the multiple referenced OST-object by the LFSCK will cause data leaking from the victims file, especially when the victims file contains some sensitive information.

		Waste resource. Depends on the duplication source size and where to put the target OST-object. The malicious user may use such mechanism to consume system space and network bandwidth.

	
	

	Remove the unrecognized file (MDT-object). To avoid above issues caused by OST-object duplication, we can destroy the unrecognized file. But since we do not know whether such file is still useful or not, simply removing is potentially dangerous. For a multiple striped file, may be only some of its OST-objects conflict with other file(s). Under such case, the removing may cause normal data loss.

	Create new empty OST-object for the unrecognized MDT-object. It is simple and reasonable. It will not cause data leaked, and will not waste system resource (only one OST object). And as the LFSCK processing, we may found another unreferenced OST-object, which may claims parent as current unrecognized MDT-object. It is quite possible that the current unrecognized MDT-object and the later unreferenced OST-object belong to the same file. So we prefer to use this solution and process as following:

	Similar as repairing the MDT-object with dangling reference, the LFSCK will allocate new OST-object with the specified object external FID and initialize it with the given parent MDT-object FID and owner attributes. Although the new created OST-object is initialized, the SUID + SGID mode will be kept until some RPC modified (write/punch/setattr) the OST-object. So we can distinguish whether the new create OST-object has been modified or not. The unrecognized MDT-object will reference the empty OST-object. It is not important on which OST the new empty OST-object will be created. It is the MDT’s duty to make the decision according to the system configuration and system space balance case. Generally, it is better to create the new OST-object on the OST that the multiple referenced OST-object resides on.

--- Comment (yong.fan, Tue, 25 Feb 2014 00:23:26 +0000) ---
The patch 7525 has been merged into 7524 and landed to master.

--- Comment (yong.fan, Mon, 2 Sep 2013 14:27:08 +0000) ---
This is the patch:

http://review.whamcloud.com/#/c/7525/
