Key:        LU-688
Summary:    A patch made to b1_8 has exposed an issue which shows itself as an issue on the Ubuntu build
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-688
Type:       Bug
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Closed
Resolution: Won't Fix
Assignee:   Brian Murrell
Reporter:   Chris Gearing
Created:    Fri, 16 Sep 2011 05:13:20 +0000
Updated:    Wed, 3 Feb 2016 22:02:00 +0000
Resolved:   Wed, 3 Feb 2016 22:02:00 +0000

--- Description ---
A patch made to b1_8 has exposed an issue which shows itself as an issue on the Ubuntu build. No other builds are affected.

The error only under Ubuntu is

make[6]: *** No rule to make target `auster.sh', needed by `all-am'.  Stop.

The strange thing is the source does not [appear] to contain the word 'auster.sh', perhaps this is a Lustre issue, but starting with Jenkins seems to make most sense.

// From the Skype Chat.

I'm trying to understand is the ubuntu failure on this build; http://build.whamcloud.com/job/lustre-reviews/2091/  which only fails for ubuntu.

The error only under Ubuntu is

make[6]: *** No rule to make target `auster.sh', needed by `all-am'.  Stop.

The strange thing is the source does not [appear] to contain the word 'auster.sh'

At present I'm trying to replicate localling, but figured whilst I do that I should ask you folks for ideas.

Michael MacDonald 13:39 

sounds like a 'make dist' problem

after a checkout from git, a source tarball is created via 'make dist', and the tarball is used to feed the package production process

ah, the commit message: LU-261 Renamed auster.sh to be auster making it like b2_1

there ya go

oh, heh.  you're the author of that commit.  

and now i understand what you mean re: the string "auster.sh"

sorry, started talking before i'd started thinking...  hmm.  this is weird.  when i pull that changeset and grep i don't find auster.sh either.

i wonder if it has something to do with the buildstep stuff in the job configuration...  looking at that now

i don't see any hard-coded instances of 'auster.sh' there either

i dunno, probably best to ping brian, as he knows the ubuntu packaging best.

chrisgearing 15:45 

Brian: Hello.

Brian J. Murrell 15:47 

chrisgearing: hi

chrisgearing 15:56 

Do you have any input into the last 2 screens of thread, we see an issue with ubuntu builds failing, but others succeeding. It is the last thread on this chat.

Brian J. Murrell 16:08 

yeah.  i'd guess it's some issue with the patch de-application/application.

hrm.  can i not checkout the branch that gerrit creates with:

git checkout c20175594a8d5cbddd22787b79e3d52478bb8612

?

nm

chrisgearing: somewhere somebody's broken b1_8 so that autogen.sh does not work on a post-"make dist"ed tarball source pool

Checking for a complete tree...

Your tree seems to be missing libcfs.

Please read README.lustrecvs for details.

chrisgearing: it seems unbelievable though, that the change that's causing that problem went in 3 years ago and this issue is only just now being discovered.  perhaps the ability to use autogen.sh on a tarball extracted source tree has just never been needed.  but even in our own building, i'd expect this to have been needed before now.

chrisgearing: probably somebody more familiar with the history of b1_8 needs to figure out the right solution.  you should file a ticket.  feel free to CC me on it.

chrisgearing 21:04 

What is the description of the ticket, I don't understand the problem you are describing.

Johann Lombardi: ok

Johann Lombardi: i am not sure i get it

Johann Lombardi: "Checking for a complete tree...

Your tree seems to be missing libcfs.

Please read README.lustrecvs for details."

Johann Lombardi: libcfs has moved in master

Johann Lombardi: but not on b1_8

Johann Lombardi: on b1_8, it is still in lnet/libcfs

Johann Lombardi: is that the problem?

Johann Lombardi: i think rread was the one handling the libcfs cleanup

chrisgearing: The build fails only on Ubuntu because it can't find auster.sh, but the words auster.sh do not exist anywhere in the source tree. I cannot understand therefore what could possibly be going on.

Johann Lombardi: hm

chrisgearing: It builds on all other distributions.

My change was rename auster.sh to auster and change the makefile which is the only place the word auster.sh existed.

Brian has lost me in his assessement [because of my lack of knowledge]

I don't even know what to put in a ticket. I can't raise it agsint b1_8 because the bug doesn't occur until my patch is pushed - which can't be pushed!

Johann Lombardi: ok, give me 5min to checkout the branch and have a look around

Johann Lombardi: btw, in the build log, i don't see anything wrong with libcfs

Johann Lombardi: it clearly fails because of something around auster.sh, so i'm not sure why brian thinks that this might somehow be related to libcfs

Johann Lombardi: chris: if you get the full log of the build and search for auster

Johann Lombardi: it says:

Johann Lombardi: reverting patch 0020-LU-261-Renamed-auster.sh-to-be-auster-making-it-like from ./ ... ok.

Johann Lombardi: so somehow the debian build system has reverted the patch

Johann Lombardi: and then later:

Johann Lombardi: dpkg-source: warning: ignoring deletion of file lustre/tests/auster

Johann Lombardi: and then later

Johann Lombardi:  lustre/quota/quota_interface.c

 lustre/tests/Makefile.am

 lustre/tests/Makefile.in

 lustre/tests/auster.sh

Johann Lombardi: ah, and then the patch is applied again (gosh)

Johann Lombardi: debian/patches/0020-LU-261Renamed-auster.sh-to-be-auster-making-it-like.dpatch:-- a/lustre/tests/Makefile.am

Checking for a complete tree...

Your tree seems to be missing libcfs.

Please read README.lustrecvs for details.

dh_testdir

Johann Lombardi: and we have the error pointed out by brian, ouf ...

chrisgearing: It reverts a bunch of patches, I wonder how it decides on which ones.

Johann Lombardi: Johann Lombardi is looking at autogen.sh

Johann Lombardi: i have no idea 

Johann Lombardi: so it checks for build/libcfs/lnet/lustre dir to be there

Johann Lombardi: but libcfs is in lnet in 1.8

Johann Lombardi: although i think we still have the dir in the root, although not used

Johann Lombardi: in any case, your patch is totally unrelated to this

Johann Lombardi: chris: let me try to repost your patch with libcfs removed from REQUIRED_DIRS

Johann Lombardi: ok, new patch pushed. let's wait for the build result.

Johann Lombardi: although this still makes no sense

chrisgearing: ta.

Johann Lombardi: hm

Johann Lombardi: Applying patch 0018-LU-607-Avoid-race-between-ldlm_pools_shrink-and-ldlm to ./ ... ok.

applying patch 0019-LU-646-port-bz23485-clarification-of-lustre-fsync-be to ./ ... ok.

applying patch 0020-LU-261-Renamed-auster.sh-to-be-auster-making-it-like to ./ ... ok.

touch patch-stamp

	see if any patches requires us to run autogen

	(for a distribution release tarball, it is expected that i

Johann Lombardi: i guess your patch required autogen to be rerun because you modified a Makefile.am

Johann Lombardi: this has probably not happen on b1_8 for a while ....

chrisgearing: Ignoring everything else are you saying that the build system does not build from the ground up?

Johann Lombardi: let me see when this libcfs was added to REQUIRED_DIRS

Johann Lombardi: ah, yes, libcfs was indeed added by Robert when he worked on the libcfs cleanup

Johann Lombardi: chrisgearing: well, i'm not sure, i just try to find a rational ....

Johann Lombardi: and the thing is there is a libcfs dir in 1.8

Johann Lombardi: although not used

Johann Lombardi: so the test should really pass ....

Johann Lombardi: tbh, i don't really understand how our build system works

Johann Lombardi: i think only brian can tell us why libcfs has suddenly disappear (or was not copied) to the tree used by the ubuntu build

Johann Lombardi: it seems like ubuntu build has been successful

Johann Lombardi: so i guess we could land the patch since checking for libcfs does not make sense. However, it would be great if Brian could tell us what is going on 

chrisgearing: Brian said soomething about the tree coming from a tar file. If I understood correctly is it possible that a cloan from git does create the empty libcfs dir, but the tar extraction does not.

--- Comment (simmonsja, Wed, 3 Feb 2016 22:02:00 +0000) ---
Really outdated old issue.

--- Comment (brian, Fri, 16 Sep 2011 06:53:24 +0000) ---
To be clear, this is an LU- ticket and not at TT- ticket.

The reason the issue only affects Ubuntu is because Ubuntu (in fact any DEB) is the only build that completely exercises the build system.  RPM based builds don't test as many steps as DEB builds do.  They should, but they don't.  But that's another ticket.

The issue here is that a git checkout has a /libcfs dir in it but a "make dist" tarball does not.  Further to the issue is that the patch that does the auster.sh rename alters a Makefile.am file.  When one of those is altered, one must run autogen.sh.  autogen.sh checks for a /libcfs dir as part of it's validation that it's running in a lustre tree.  Since an unpacked tarball doesn't have the /libcfs dir in it, that fails.  Since autogen.sh fails to run (and really, the build should fail and stop there, but again, that's another ticket) lustre/tests/Makefile is not re-generated from lustre/tests/Makefile.am and thus the auster.sh rename is not reflected in that Makefile.

So, the solution here is whatever allows autogen.sh to be run in a tarball unpacked source tree.  That could mean removing the libcfs check from autogen.sh or including the (emptry) libcfs dir in the tarball, or perhaps something else.  I'm not familiar enough with what's all gone on around that to be definitive myself.

Maybe one needs to stand back a bit and compare b1_8 to master in this regard and make them more similar.
