Key:        LU-8674
Summary:    A lightweight internal policy engine of Lustre for HSM, OST pool migration, file heat, inotify and so on
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-8674
Type:       New Feature
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Closed
Resolution: Fixed
Assignee:   Li Xi
Reporter:   Li Xi
Created:    Fri, 7 Oct 2016 08:47:20 +0000
Updated:    Fri, 2 Jun 2017 19:54:00 +0000
Resolved:   Fri, 2 Jun 2017 19:54:00 +0000
Labels:     cea

--- Description ---
Features of Lustre like HSM and OST pool based on SSD have enabled a lot of

new use cases, which makes data management of Lustre file system a new daily

work. The Robinhood Policy Engine is able to do various kinds of data

management based on pre-configured rules and has been confirmed as a versatile

tool to manage large Lustre file systems. However, using Robinhood requires

external machine with stronge CPU, memory and storage. And setuping and

configuring Robinhood properly requires extra efforts from users. That is why

we(DDN) are proposing a policy engine which is implemented completely inside

Lustre. In order to avoid performance regression and complexity, this policy

engine is implemented in a very lightweight way. That means, it can only

support a limited part of use cases, which might be much less than what

Robinhood can do. However, this new policy engine could still be useful for

a lot of use cases, especially for the ones which are relatively simpler.

The core component of policy engine is an arithmetic unit which can calculate

the value of a rule that can be configured by users in run time. The rule is an

arithmetic expression. An expression is either 1) an number, or 2) a constant

name, or 3) a system attribute name, or 4) an object attribute name, or 5) two

expression that are combined together by an operator.

The arithmetic values of all expressions are calculated as unsigned 64 bit

number, so all unsigned 64 bit numbers can be used in the expression. 

A constant name is only an alias of an 64 bit number, which should already

been pre-defined in Lustre codes. The value of the constant, thus, is already

been pre-defined. An typical rule for HSM might use constants hsma_bit_[

archive|restore|remove|cancel] to indicate the HSM actions that

should be taken after evaluating the rule.

A system attribute is the system wide attribute of Lustre or the kernel. The

free space is an typical example of system state on OST. And free inode number

on MDT is another example. Date time is an example of the system attribute

which is independent of Lustre. When evaluating the value of the expression,

the value of the system attribute will be used. And since the arithmetic value

is 64 bit, all the attribute values will be 64 bit numbers.

An object attribute name could be any attribute name that is available from

the corresponding Lustre objects, usually MDT objects and OST objects.

Avaliable object attribute names include but not limited to the attributes

that can be read by getattr() syscall, such as atime, mtime, ctime, size,

mode, uid, gid, blocks, type, flags, nlink, rdev, blksize, etc.

An operator could be almost any integer operations that can be used in C

language, including arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /, %), relational and

logical operators (==, !=, >, >=, >).

In order to simplify the parsing of the expression in Lustre, the expression

of the rule should be configured in the form of Polish notation

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_notation). An rule that will trigger

HSM archive action if the modify timestamp of the file is 1 minute ealier than

the system time could be set by the following command:

echo -n "& - >= mtime - sys_time 60 1 hsma_bit_archive" > /proc/fs/lustre/mdt/lustre-MDT0000/hsm_policy_rule

Currently, no optimization of the expression will be done by Lustre when being

set, even the way to optimize it is obvious. For example, "&& 0 expression1" is

essentially equal to "0", however, the value of "expression1" will still be

evaluated when getting the value of the entire expression. That means, before

setting the expression rule, it should be optimized either manually or through

external tool. An external userspace tool which can transfer normal notation

with parenthesis to Polish notation and at the same time optimize the

expression could be really helpful for the users.

The configured rule could be evaluated either synchronously or asynchronously.

Synchronous evaluation means to evaluate the expression in the context of a

service thread. For example, when a file is being accessed, the expression of

the rule will be calculated in the service thread. Corresponding actions will

be triggered by the policy engine if the value of the expression matches a

predefined pattern. In order to avoid performance regression, the speed of

the synchronous evaluation is ciritial. And that is the reason why only one

rule is supported by synchronous evaluation.

However, after synchronous evaluation triggers action job, asynchronous

evaluation could be done on multiple pre-configured rules when handling

the action job. Asynchrouse evaluation is done in a dedicated thread pool

of policy engine so no performance regression will be caused by asynchrous

evaluation. And the service thread pool could scan the whole OST/MDT from

time to time to find the objects that match the rules.

A set of rules like "condition1 -> action1", "condition2 -> action2",

and "condition3 -> action3" could be configured to asynchronous evaluation

of policy engine. And in order to trigger job properly by synchronous

evaluation, a rule that equal to but more optimized than

"|| condition1 || condition2 condition3" should be set.

Obviously, this policy engine has some limitations. And all the things that

this policy engine could do on HSM should be able be accomplished by using

Robinhood.

Even though the current codes only have HSM support, this policy engine could

be potentially used for other features which need configurable policies.

Following is a list of the features:

	Data migration between SSD OST pool and normal OST pool. The policy engine

could use a new feature named file heat to decide which data to move to SSD

pool.

	RPC classfication in NRS TBF policy. Currently, NRS TBF policy classify RPCs

based on NID/JobID. By using the expression of this policy engine, the TBF

policy could classify RPCs based on an expression of RPC attributes which can

be configured by users. This could enable much more use cases than existing

classfication.

	Inotify is a useful feature when montoring the events of file systems. But

Lustre itself doesn't support system wide inotify. By using the lightweight

policy engine, a notification mechanism that might be more powerful and

efficient than inotify could be implemented for Lustre. In order to act like

inotify, when the pre-configured rule is matched, instead of applying

background actions, this policy engine could send a notification to the

watching application. Because an expression could be used to filter the

desired events from the original source, the extra overhead such as RPCs

caused by notification could be minimized.

	Cache management tuning on different levels. The policy engine could be used

in cache management systems in order to make the decision of data prefetching

or cache eviction.

--- Comment (lixi, Fri, 2 Jun 2017 19:54:00 +0000) ---
I am closing this because user-space policy engine looks much flexible than this.

--- Comment (pjones, Fri, 7 Oct 2016 13:02:35 +0000) ---
Thanks for the suggestion Li Xi

--- Comment (gerrit, Fri, 7 Oct 2016 08:56:40 +0000) ---
Li Xi (lixi@ddn.com) uploaded a new patch: http://review.whamcloud.com/23014

Subject: LU-8674 obd: Add a general policy engine

Project: fs/lustre-release

Branch: master

Current Patch Set: 1

Commit: d6add7688c92d3ac6be218cc14e29977c49b73d9
