Key:        LU-8011
Summary:    Add HSM_EXEC action
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-8011
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   WC Triage
Reporter:   Robert Read
Created:    Tue, 12 Apr 2016 01:49:41 +0000
Updated:    Tue, 12 Apr 2016 16:08:24 +0000

--- Description ---
While chatting at  LUG last week,  hdoreau mentioned an interesting idea of an having an HSM action that a policy engine could use to send a command (via the data field) directly to a data mover. We agreed that "HSMA_EXEC" seemed like a good name for this. 

Could it be that this is the use case that HSMA_NONE was intended for? If so, then perhaps we could rename in to appear less vestigial.

--- Comment (rread, Tue, 12 Apr 2016 16:08:24 +0000) ---
I believe hdoreau had some use cases in mind, but we didn't go into details. I can imagine it would be useful for users to manage the archive storage pools and archive rules together in one tool.  I suppose it could also be used by the policy engine to tell the archive to pre-fetch a data set it needs to restore or flush the disk cache to make room for the large about of data it's about to send. 

Another possible use case I've been thinking about creating a test mover that used parameters in do failure injection, such pause the request for XX seconds, drop request, fail with error, etc. When I heard about the exec idea, I thought it might also be useful for this as well.

Submitting HSM actions requires root privilege, so a service that accepts HSM actions from the network should certainly be reasonable secured, agreed. The mover would be responsible for ensuring that only the commands it exposed could be executed, and not arbitrary commands. 

It seems whatever purpose HSMA_NONE has now could be achieved with HSMA_EXEC("").

--- Comment (adilger, Tue, 12 Apr 2016 06:07:33 +0000) ---
There is a potential security risk from this, especially since we don't have any way to authenticate connections to the copytools.  Currently, there is relatively low risk of some rogue process copying files to the archive, but if we allow arbitrary commands from a remote system this could be a problem.

The question is whether there is a limited set of operations that are needed and could be plumbed in?  What are the proposed use cases for this?

Rather than repurpose HSMA_NONE, why not just add a new operation type?
